Metabolic signals trigger glucose-induced inactivation of maltose permease in Saccharomyces.

Organisms such as Saccharomyces capable of utilizing several different sugars selectively ferment glucose when less desirable carbon sources are also available. This is achieved by several mechanisms. Glucose down-regulates the transcription of genes involved in utilization of these alternate carbon sources. Additionally, it causes posttranslational modifications of enzymes and transporters, leading to their inactivation and/or degradation. Two glucose sensing and signaling pathways stimulate glucose-induced inactivation of maltose permease. Pathway 1 uses Rgt2p as a sensor of extracellular glucose and causes degradation of maltose permease protein. Pathway 2 is dependent on glucose transport and stimulates degradation of permease protein and very rapid inactivation of maltose transport activity, more rapid than can be explained by loss of protein alone. In this report, we characterize signal generation through pathway 2 using the rapid inactivation of maltose transport activity as an assay of signaling activity. We find that pathway 2 is dependent on HXK2 and to a lesser extent HXK1. The correlation between pathway 2 signaling and glucose repression suggests that these pathways share common upstream components. We demonstrate that glucose transport via galactose permease is able to stimulate pathway 2. Moreover, rapid transport and fermentation of a number of fermentable sugars (including galactose and maltose, not just glucose) are sufficient to generate a pathway 2 signal. These results indicate that pathway 2 responds to a high rate of sugar fermentation and monitors an intracellular metabolic signal. Production of this signal is not specific to glucose, glucose catabolism, glucose transport by the Hxt transporters, or glucose phosphorylation by hexokinase 1 or 2. Similarities between this yeast glucose sensing pathway and glucose sensing mechanisms in mammalian cells are discussed.