G1 cyclin degradation: the PEST motif of yeast Cln2 is necessary, but not sufficient, for rapid protein turnover.

The 545-residue Cln2 protein, like the other G1 cyclins of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is a very unstable protein. This instability is thought to play a critical role in regulating cell cycle progression. The carboxyl-terminal domains of Cln2 and the other G1 cyclins contain sequences rich in Pro, Glu (and Asp), Ser, and Thr (so-called PEST motifs) that have been postulated to make up the signals that are responsible for the rapid degradation of these and other unstable proteins. To test this hypothesis, the carboxyl-terminal 178 residues of Cln2 were fused to the C terminus of a reporter enzyme, a truncated form of human thymidine kinase (hTK delta 40). The resulting chimeric protein (hTK delta 40-Cln2) retained thymidine kinase activity but was markedly less stable than hTK, hTK delta 40, or an hTK-beta-galactosidase fusion protein, as judged by enzyme assay, immunoblotting with anti-hTK antibodies, pulse-chase analysis of the radiolabeled polypeptides, and ability to support the growth of a thymidylate auxotroph (cdc21 mutant) on thymidine-containing medium. Thus, the presence of the Cln2 PEST domain was sufficient to destabilize a heterologous protein. Furthermore, the half-life of hTK delta 40-Cln2 was similar to that of authentic Cln2, and the rate of degradation of neither protein was detectably enhanced by treatments known to cause G1 arrest, including exposure of MATa haploids to alpha-factor mating pheromone and shifting cdc28ts and cdc34ts mutants to the restrictive temperature. These results suggest that the major signals responsible for Cln2 instability are confined to its C-terminal third. Because hTK delta 40-Cln2 and Cln2 were expressed from heterologous promoters yet their half-lives both in asynchronous cultures and when arrested at various cell cycle stages were always similar, the Cln2 PEST domain contains a signal for rapid protein turnover that is constitutively active and operative throughout the cell cycle. Removal of the 37 codons that encode the most prominent PEST-like segment from either hTK delta 40-Cln2 or Cln2 decreased the turnover rate of the resulting proteins, as expected; however, an hTK delta 40 chimera containing only this 37-residue segment was not detectably destabilized, suggesting that this PEST sequence, when removed from its normal context, is not a self-contained determinant of protein instability.