Conformations of yeast alpha-mating factor and analog peptides as bound to phospholipid bilayer. Correlation of membrane-bound conformation with physiological activity.

The transferred nuclear Overhauser effects of yeast alpha-mating factor [(1-13)peptide] in the presence of various spin-labeled phosphatidylcholines in small unilamellar vesicles of perdeuterated phosphatidylcholine have been analyzed. From the analysis of the quenching effect by spin-labels, the depth of amino acid side chains of the mating factor in phospholipid bilayer has been elucidated. The Leu4 and Leu6 residues are buried deeply in the apolar region of the phospholipid bilayer while the hydrophilic residues such as Gln5 and Lys7 are in the shallow region of the bilayer. The interaction of the side chains of Trp1 and Trp3 residues of alpha-mating factor with the hydrophobic interior of the bilayer contributes to the binding of this peptide with the phosphatidylcholine bilayer. The conformation of des-Trp1-alpha-mating-factor [(2-13)peptide] in the membrane-bound state has been found to be similar to that of (1-13)peptide from the analysis of transferred nuclear Overhauser effects in the presence of mixed vesicles of perdeuterated phosphatidylcholine and perdeuterated phosphatidylserine. The incorporation of this acidic phospholipid in the vesicle remarkably enhances the binding of (1-13)peptide and analog peptides. However, such modifications that weaken the interaction with phospholipid bilayer (deletion of Trp1 and substitution of Trp3 by Gly or Ala) appreciably lower the physiological activity. Transferred nuclear Overhauser effect analyses have also been made of [DHis2]peptide, [DLeu6]peptide and [DLys7]peptide in the presence of the vesicles of perdeuterated phosphatidylcholine. The main-chain conformations of these three analogs in the membrane-bound state have been found to be similar to that of (1-13)peptide, although the side-chain conformations of the D-amino acid residues are naturally different from those of the L-amino acid ones. Thus, the physiological activities of the (1-13)peptide and a variety of analog peptides are found to correlate with the affinities to the phosphatidylcholine/phosphatidylserine membrane and with the molecular conformations in the membrane-bound state.