Adjacent zinc-finger motifs in multiple zinc-finger peptides from SWI5 form structurally independent, flexibly linked domains.

Peptides containing either one, two or three of the three zinc-finger motifs from the yeast transcription factor SWI5 have been prepared by expression in Escherichia coli. The DNA binding characteristics of these peptides were investigated, and a two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (n.m.r.) study undertaken to establish the three-dimensional structures of the two-finger peptide. The peptide containing fingers 1 and 2 binds sequence specifically to two thirds of the DNA binding site recognized either by intact SWI5 or by the isolated three-finger peptide, and hence has the correct tertiary fold for DNA recognition. These results also establish the polarity of DNA binding, since the N-terminal two fingers of SWI5 bind to the 5' end of the DNA binding site. Mild proteolysis of the three-finger peptide using trypsin results in a small number of discrete products, which is consistent with the presence of three structured mini-domains. Nearly complete n.m.r. signal assignments were obtained for two peptides containing finger 2 alone or fingers 1 + 2. Comparison of two-dimensional spectra of these peptides and others clearly shows that the NOE enhancements and chemical shifts characteristic of each finger are quite insensitive to the presence or absence of neighbouring fingers. This clearly indicates that adjacent zinc-finger domains are structurally independent in these peptides from SWI5. However, there must be some steric limitations on the possible relative orientations of the fingers, and to establish limits for these a set of structures for the peptide containing fingers 1 + 2 was calculated using the YASAP simulated annealing protocol in conjunction with n.m.r.-based constraints. A more detailed description of the three-dimensional structures of finger 1 and finger 2, and their relationship to other previously determined structures of single zinc-fingers, is given in the accompanying paper.